**Unit 6: The 1930s Through WWII** <span id="6"></span> 
*The New Deal offered government employment for artists.  Themes related
to self-reliance, as represented in broad categorical styles best known
as **Regionalism **and **Social Realism**, crossed racial lines in the
art world.  Public murals were a new feature of the national cultural
landscape, and were largely influenced by Mexican mural painters. 
Documentary photography gained prominence.  Artists fleeing Europe in
the 1930s brought “avant-garde” art forms to America, definitively.  
  *

**6.1 "American Scene” Painters and Documentary Photography** <span
id="6.1"></span> 
*Note: Generally, rural artists or artists focusing on rural subjects
were considered Regionalist, while those in and of the cities were known
as Social Realists, although the artists themselves, as well as their
subjects, overlapped.  Many combined narrative figuration with
idiosyncratic stylization that was likely influenced by contemporary
abstraction.  The Farm Securities Administration (FSA) commissioned
extensive photographic documentation of rural families around the
country that had been deeply affected by the Depression for widespread
publication.  FSA photographs have been much studied in terms of
“deconstructing” the supposed neutral and mechanical work of the
journalistic photographer.*

-   **Web Media: Smithsonian American Art Museum: Ann Wagner’s
    “Picturing the 1930s”**
    Link: Smithsonian American Art Museum: Ann Wagner’s [“Picturing the
    1930s”](http://americanart.si.edu/exhibitions/archive/2009/1934/)
    (HTML)  
        
     Podcast available in:  

    [Quicktime](http://americanart.si.edu/collections/insight/podcasts/audio/1934_anewdeal.m4v)  

    [iTunes](http://itunes.apple.com/podcast/smithsonian-american-art-museum/id264356445)
    (Podcast \#30)  
        
     Instructions:  Scroll down briefly until you have access to a
    podcast tour via Quicktime or iTunes and download the podcast (it
    may take a few minutes; the program is 31 minutes long).  Listen to
    the curator’s tour of the traveling exhibition “Picturing the
    1930s,” organized and opened at The Smithsonian Institution of
    American Art (2/27/2009-1/3/2010).  The emphasis is on the nature
    and extent of government work and support for artists in this
    period.  Take notes on general comments and on a few specific works
    discussed.  Afterwards, return to the main page and browse the
    website.  (Note the national touring schedule, extended through May
    2014; perhaps you may be able to view the exhibition first-hand.) 
    Go to the “slide” section near the top of the page, which includes
    over 50 images.   
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Smithsonian American Art Museum, “Scenes of American
    Life”**
    Link:  Smithsonian American Art Museum, [“Scenes of American
    Life”](http://americanart.si.edu/exhibitions/online/t2go/1sa/image-frame.html)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: View this online presentation of 62 works from this
    period with brief descriptions.   
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Activity: The Saylor Foundation’s American Art Activity 6**
    Link: The Saylor Foundation’s American Art Activity 6 (PDF)  
      
     Instructions: Choose two of paintings viewed on the Smithsonian Art
    Museum sites above for a comparative essay (2 – 3 pages in length). 
    In making your choice, consider how each relates to the exhibition’s
    themes and scope.  (Always present introductory data and a detailed
    description of the works of art discussed.)

-   **Web Media: New Britain Museum of American Art, “The Murals of
    Thomas Hart Benton”**
    Link: New Britain Museum of American Art, [“The Murals of Thomas
    Hart
    Benton”](http://www.nbmaa.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=58&Itemid=89)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Explore the site above for a good overview of
    America’s leading “Regionalist.”  The images are unfortunately
    small; visit the website below (among others) for better
    reproductions (of similar works).   
        
     -[Whitney Museum of American Art, Collection
    Database](http://www.whitney.org/Collection/ThomasHartBenton)
    (HTML)  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Reading: University of Virginia American Studies Program: “Going
    Back to Iowa: The World of Grant Wood.”**
    Link: University of Virginia American Studies Program: “[Going Back
    to Iowa: The World of Grant
    Wood](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~ma98/haven/wood/intro.html)”
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: “Enter” and browse this website on the second leading
    Regionalist, Grant Wood.  This will broaden your understanding of
    the issues, styles and subjects associated with this loose
    movement.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Missouri Senate: Kids’ Page: “New Video-The Thomas Hart
    Benton Murals”**
    Link: Missouri Senate: Kids’ Page: [“New Video- The Thomas Hart
    Benton”](http://www.senate.mo.gov/kidspage/index.html) (Windows
    Media Player)  
        
     Instructions: Click on the link for an excellent, detailed
    14-minute talk about a mural project in the Missouri State House,
    including subject matter, style, technique, development.  (Note: The
    quality of the video images varies throughout.)   
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Library of Congress: “FSA/OWI Photographs”**
    Link: Library of Congress: [“FSA/OWI
    Photographs”](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/fsahtml/) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Click the embedded link for “‘Migrant Mother’
    Photographs”; view the renowned series by Dorothea Lange.  Back on
    the homepage, near the bottom, view: “Documenting America:
    Photographers on Assignment.”  See also:  
                  
     -Living History Farm: Billy Ganzel’s [“FSA
    Photography”](http://www.livinghistoryfarm.org/farminginthe30s/water_14.html)
    (HTML)  
     Note: This is the website of Wessel’s Living History Farm.  See the
    main page, examining the images and exploring several of the
    extensive links about photographic journalism in the West during the
    Depression.  
        
     -The University of Virginia: Shelley Staples’ “[Negotiating the
    Racial Mountain: The Depression Era Murals of Aaron
    Douglas”](http://xroads.virginia.edu/%7EMA03/staples/douglas/home.html)
    (HTML)  
     Note: Read through this site on later work by Aaron Douglas.  
        
     -The Metropolitan Museum of Art: “*[African American Artists
    1929-1945: Prints, Drawings and Paintings in the Metropolitan Museum
    of
    Art](http://www.metmuseum.org/about-the-museum/press-room/exhibitions/2003/africanamerican-artists-19291945--prints-drawings-and-paintings-in-the-metropolitan-museum-of-art)*”
    (HTML)  
        

-   **Web Media: Smithsonian American Art Museum: “William H. Johnson”**
    Link: Smithsonian American Art Museum: [“William H.
    Johnson”](http://americanart.si.edu/collections/search/artist/?id=2486)
    (HTML and Adobe Flash)  
        
     Instructions:  Read and view images; then, from links on lower
    right section of the page, under “Online Exhibitions,” click on
    “William H. Johnson: American Art” and run through the
    presentation.  (Move cursor over images for data).  Then return to
    the main Johnson page and choose “Works in the Collection by William
    H. Johnson.”  You will see that the museum owns over 1000 works. 
    Run through a few pages and enlarge several images.    
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Activity: The Saylor Foundation’s American Art Activity 7**
    Link: The Saylor Foundation’s American Art Activity 7 (PDF)  
      
     Instructions: Describe briefly the overall aesthetic (artistic
    feeling/form) of Johnson’s main style (1 page in length).  Judging
    from your viewing, what appear to be some of the major influences on
    his work?

**6.2 Abstraction and Surrealism** <span id="6.2"></span> 
*Note: Abstraction and other “progressive” styles from Europe were
fostered by emerging art criticism in New York; this development helped
establish New York’s prominence as the center of the contemporary art
world after WWII.*

-   **Web Media: Museum of Modern Art, “Stuart Davis”**
    Link: Museum of Modern Art, [“Stuart
    Davis”](http://moma.org/collection/artist.php?artist_id=1412)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Examine the linked material above.  Davis takes
    subjects of the “American scene” and pushes them towards
    abstraction, largely influenced by cubism.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: The Metropolitan Museum of Art "Surrealism"**
    Link: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, *Heilbrunn Timeline of Art
    History: James Voorheis’
    “*[Surrealism](http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/surr/hd_surr.htm#ixzz1NY812Ehc)*”*  
        
     Instructions: Read the linked entry and browse the accompanying
    images for an overview of the Surrealist movement, which began in
    Paris.  Then see the links below on specific American artists.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.  
      

-   **Web Media: Museum of Modern Art: “About Joseph Cornell”**
    Link: Museum of Modern Art: [“About Joseph
    Cornell”](http://moma.org/collection/browse_results.php?criteria=O%3AAD%3AE%3A1247&page_number=&template_id=6&sort_order=1#bio)
    (HTML)  
                  
     Instructions: Read about the artist and run through available
    images at the sliding bar on the top of the page, enlarging several
    of them.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Smithsonian American Art Museum: “Joseph Cornell:
    Navigating the Imagination” (2006-2007)**
    Link:  Smithsonian American Art Museum: [“Joseph Cornell: Navigating
    the Imagination”
    (2006-2007)](http://americanart.si.edu/exhibitions/online/cornell/imagination/)
    (Adobe Flash)  
        
     Instructions: View the slide show of 21 works.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Dorothea Tanning Website**
    Link: [Dorothea Tanning Website](http://www.dorotheatanning.org/)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: As of October 2010, the artist Dorothea Tanning is
    100 years old and continues to supervise this website.  Click
    “Dorothea Tanning” for an introduction.  Then return to homepage to
    click, “Life and Works”; click on the reproductions on the first
    page; each has a statement by the artist about the work.   
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

**6.3 Case Study: Frank Lloyd Wright, America’s Premier Architect**
<span id="6.3"></span> 
*Note: Wright became the first internationally recognized American
architect.  His unique “**Prairie Style**” for domestic buildings was
inspired by the mid-Western landscape.  He rarely looked to European
forms and was instead influenced by Japanese aesthetics (this is
especially apparent in his use of natural materials).  He deplored the
verticality of New York City and only reluctantly took on the commission
for the Guggenheim Museum in the late 1940s.*

-   **Web Media: Frank Lloyd Wright Preservation Trust: “Robie House”**
    Link: Frank Lloyd Wright Preservation Trust: [“Robie
    House”](http://www.gowright.org/research/wright-robie-house.html) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Read the introduction; click on the link for “Prairie
    Style” (in the left menu or embedded in the text) for an explanation
    of the term.   
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation Website**
    Link: [Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation
    Website](http://www.franklloydwright.org) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: On the menu at the top, click on the link for
    “Wright’s Life and Work” and read the overview.  Then read “A Brief
    Biography” from the menu at left.  Return to the left menu and click
    on “Public Sites.”  Scroll down column of images; click website
    links for the following:   
        
     -Beth Shalom Synagogue (PA); from the bottom menu of the homepage,
    click on and read “History; then return to choose “Virtual Tour,”
    and visit.  
        
     -Fallingwater (PA); a major, extensive website.  By clicking on
    “Explore,” then “Multimedia,” and then “Tours,” you can take the
    “Seasonal Tour” to get a feel for the site; then return to take the
    “Architectural Tour.”  
        
     -Hollyhock House (CA); from the top menu, click on “Media”; then
    scroll to “Main Gallery” and click through the images.    
        
     -Unity Temple (IL); from the top menu, click on “The Building” and
    then “Explore Unity Temple,” then “Photo Galleries.”  Browse the
    images.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Guggenheim Museum: “Keeping Faith with an Idea: A Time
    Line of the Guggenheim Museum 1943-1959”**
    Link: Guggenheim Museum: [“Keeping Faith with an Idea:  A Time Line
    of the Guggenheim Museum
    1943-1959”](http://web.guggenheim.org/timeline/index.html)(HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Explore the “Timeline.”  Note that Edward Hopper and
    Andrew Wyeth are prominent among artists who continue with “American
    Scene” painting into the post war years.  See the links below for
    further information on them:  
        
     - Whitney Museum of American Art: [“Modern Life: Edward Hopper and
    his Time”](http://www.whitney.org/Exhibitions/ModernLife) (HTML)  
        
     -[Andrew Wyeth Website](http://andrewwyeth.com/) (HTML)  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.


