**Unit 7: Post-War America and the Art World: Abstract Expressionism to
New Political Art, Stylistic Pluralism, Diversity** <span
id="7"></span> 
*In the wake of a decimated Europe, post-war America prospered.  The
Cold War with the Soviet Union (USSR) ensued.  Abstraction triumphed as
the dominant mode of picture-making, but was challenged substantially by
the emergence of Pop Art, which attempted to reconnect directly with
modern American life.  Gradually, diverse representational forms made a
come-back, influenced by “counter-cultural” politics, along with
tendencies towards artistic expressions of gender and ethnic identity. *

**7.1 Abstract Expressionism and Minimalism** <span id="7.1"></span> 
*Note: “**Non-objective**” abstraction on a super-sized scale became
nearly a national style in America.  Much (but by no means all) of it
was gestural and also known as “Action Painting.”  Until recently, a
small number of artists (white; male) were seen as the embodiment of its
essence, although it actually encompassed diverse sensibilities and
intentions, including spiritual, emotional, and political ones.  An
off-shoot known as Minimalism toned down the gesture and expressive
color and focused on surface texture, shape, and light in both painting
and sculpture.*

-   **Reading: Encyclopedia of Irish and World Art: “Abstract
    Expressionism”**
    Link:  Encyclopedia of Irish and World Art: [“Abstract
    Expressionism”](http://www.visual-arts-cork.com/history-of-art/abstract-expressionism.htm)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions:  Read through the entire entry on the background and
    main figures of the loose movement or style.  (Extensive links are
    provided; look at other material on **Abstract Expressionism** below
    and then perhaps return and explore additional links here.)   
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: National Gallery of Art: “Mark Rothko”**
    Link: National Gallery of Art: [“Mark
    Rothko”](http://www.nga.gov/feature/rothko/rothkosplash.shtm)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: View the entire presentation.  Rothko’s oeuvre moves
    from Surrealism to total abstraction focused on expansive planes of
    color.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Museum of Modern Art: “Abstract Expressionism New
    York”**
    Link: Museum of Modern Art: [“*Abstract Expressionism New
    York*”](http://www.moma.org/interactives/exhibitions/2010/abexny/)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions:  Read the introduction and click the embedded link
    titled “view the video” in order to listen to curator Ann Temkin. 
    From the right hand column menu, choose “From the Curator: Franz
    Kline” and view the linked video (about 4 minutes).  Then return to
    exhibition homepage (above) and choose “Featured Works” (top menu). 
    Enlarge/view data on the eight works.  Each entry has links to other
    works by the artists represented.  View a few; choose the one whose
    work most immediately appeals to you for the assignment below.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Activity: The Saylor Foundation’s American Art Activity 8**
    Link: The Saylor Foundation’s American Art Activity 8 (PDF)  
        
     Instructions: Pretend you are writing an art review (1 – 2 pages in
    length) for a one-person show by the artist you choose.  Describe
    the basic aesthetic of the work.  Try to assess what is engaging and
    interesting about it in terms of how the artist uses form (color;
    technique; etc.).  Do not use “first person” (i.e., “I like…”). 
    While reactions to abstract art focus on formal perceptions and
    emotional responses, think about whether any content is suggested
    based on the socio-political contexts of the era; comment briefly. 

-   **Web Media: Museum of Modern Art: “Minimalism”**
    Link: Museum of Modern Art:
    [“Minimalism”](http://www.moma.org/collection/details.php?theme_id=10459&texttype=2)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Read the introduction and view the six linked images.
    (You can enlarge them.)  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Guggenheim Museum: “Minimalism”**
    Link: Guggenheim Museum:
    [“Minimalism”](http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/collections/collection-online/show-list/movement/?search=Minimalism)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Read the introduction and view the 17 images. (You
    can enlarge them and read notes on each.)  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: The New Yorker: Peter Schjeldahl’s “Finish Fetish”**
    Link: The New Yorker: Peter Schjeldahl’s [“Finish
    Fetish”](http://www.newyorker.com/online/multimedia/2010/01/25/100125_audioslideshow_minimalism)
    (Adobe Flash)  
        
     Instructions: View this presentation on a New York exhibition of
    California Minimalists from *The New Yorker*, January 25, 2010 (4
    minutes).  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

**7.2 Pop Art and Other Figurative Styles** <span id="7.2"></span> 
*Note: Some artists were alienated by abstraction’s lack of connection
to everyday life.  Consumer products, comic book heroes, movie stars,
and front page news became the subjects of Pop Art.  Photorealist
painting, which imitated photographic effects in painstaking detail, was
an off-shoot of the movement.  This genre looked back to the early
trompe l’oeil traditions we saw earlier in this course.  These artists
used tracing and photographic projection to create compositions in ways
that pre-figure digital image programs like Photoshop.  Looser
representational styles harking back to earlier Realism eventually made
a comeback.  *

-   **Web Media: The Metropolitan Museum of Art: Nan Rosenthal’s "Jasper
    Johns (Born 1930)"**
    Link: The Metropolitan Museum of Art: Nan Rosenthal’s ["Jasper Johns
    (Born
    1930)"](http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/john/hd_john.htm) (HTML)  
      
     Instructions: Johns is transitional, bridging the gap between
    Abstract Expressionism and Pop Art.  His extended series of American
    flags has been interpreted variously.   
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Museum of Modern Art: “Andy Warhol’s Gold Marilyn
    Monroe, 1962”**
    Link: Museum of Modern Art: [“Andy Warhol’s *Gold Marilyn Monroe*,
    1962”](http://www.moma.org/collection/browse_results.php?criteria=O%3AAD%3AE%3A6246&page_number=30&template_id=1&sort_order=1) (HTML)  
        
     Also available in:  
     [MP3](http://www.moma.org/audio_file/audio_file/82/411e.mp3)  
        
     Instructions: View the image/entry and listen to audio link at
    lower left (about 2 minutes).  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Reading: Wikipedia’s “Pop Art”**
    Link: Wikipedia’s [“Pop
    Art”](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pop_Art) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Read this overview of “Pop Art.”  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Museum of Modern Art: “Andy Warhol’s Campbell’s Soup
    Cans, 1962”**
    Link: Museum of Modern Art: [“Andy Warhol’s *Campbell’s Soup Cans*,
    1962”](http://www.moma.org/collection/browse_results.php?criteria=O%3AAD%3AE%3A6246&page_number=32&template_id=1&sort_order=1) 
    (Adobe Flash)  
      
     Also available in:  

    [MP3](http://www.moma.org/audio_file/audio_file/1110/OE_24_CampbellSoupCans_edit.mp3)  
        
     Instructions: View the image/entry and listen to audio link at
    lower left (about 2 minutes).  
      
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: San Francisco Museum of Modern Art: “About Andy
    Warhol”**
    Link: San Francisco Museum of Modern Art: [“About Andy
    Warhol”](http://www.sfmoma.org/multimedia/audio/116) (Adobe Flash)  
        
     Also available in:  

    [M4a](http://www.sfmoma.org/media/audio/audio_tours/aud_382a_AWARHOL.m4a)
    (Audio)  
        
     Instructions: Listen to this audio clip on Any Warhol (about 1
    minute).  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Roy Lichtenstein Foundation Website**
    Link: [Roy Lichtenstein Foundation
    Website](http://www.lichtensteinfoundation.org/) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions:  Click on “Enter,” and then, from left menu, choose
    “Art.”  From the timeline at top of page, click on several of the
    years between 1960s and 1970s for illustrations of his work.  (Don’t
    worry about the text of the detailed timeline.)  Then, return to the
    homepage and click on “Current and Upcoming Exhibitions” (in the
    left hand side menu) for installation shots and varied thematic
    works.   Back on the homepage, choose “Read Lichtenstein Articles”
    and click on and read the “Special Report: The Story of Pop!”
    (*Newsweek*, April 25, 1966).  Continue to browse as interested.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Whitney Museum of American Art, “Oldenburg” (collection
    search results)**
    Link: Whitney Museum of American Art,
    “[Oldenburg](http://whitney.org/Search?query=oldenburg)” (HTML &
    Adobe Flash)  
        
     Instructions: On this page are four examples of early Pop sculpture
    by Claes Oldenburg, and one sketch for a later large sculpture in
    collaboration with the artist’s wife, Coosje van Bruggen.  Click
    each image to enlarge and view.  Then scroll down the main page to
    the section, “Watch and Listen”; view two short videos:
    “Installation of Claes Oldenburg’s *Giant BLT*,” and “Claes
    Oldenburg discusses *Ice Bag-C*.”    
      
     Optional: third video on conservation of *Ice Bag-C*.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Reading: Wikipedia’s “Photorealism”**
    Link: Wikipedia’s
    [“Photorealism”](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Photorealism) (HTML)  
      
     Instructions: Read this summary of “Photorealism.”  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Deutsch-Guggenheim: “Picturing America: Photorealism in
    the 1970s”**
    Link: Deutsch-Guggenheim: [“Picturing America: Photorealism in the
    1970s”](http://www.deutsche-guggenheim.de/e/ausstellungen-picturingamerica01.php)
    (HTML)  
                  
     Instructions: Explore the above exhibition.  
      
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: YouTube: Deutschebankgroup, Vernissage: “Picturing
    America: Photorealism in the 1970s”**
    Link: YouTube: Deutschebankgroup, Vernissage: [“Picturing America:
    Photorealism in the
    1970s”](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nf2DsaSEP_w) (YouTube)  
        
     Instructions: View this clip, which includes comments by the
    curator and artists in the exhibition (about 7 minutes).  For more
    information on photorealism, visit:  
        
     - *Artnet Magazine*: Donald Kuspit’s [“The Real in
    Photorealism”](http://www.artnet.com/magazineus/features/kuspit/photorealism12-22-09.asp)
    (HTML)  
     Note: This is a December 22, 2009 art review with illustrations.  
        
     -Art Register Press: Virginia Anne Bonito’s [“*Don Eddy:  The
    Resonance of Realism in the Art of Post War
    America*”](http://www.artregisterpress.com/DonEddy/Files/Frontispiece.html)
    (HTML)  
     Note: In this art history **monograph **published for the internet
    by ArtregisterPress.com, leading photorealist Don Eddy provides an
    extensive interpretation of various works.  Eddy creates layered
    iconography with photorealist techniques.   
        
     -Saatchi Gallery: [“Duane
    Hanson”](http://www.saatchi-gallery.co.uk/artists/duane_hanson.htm)
    (HTML)  
     Note: This webpage introduces Duane Hanson, a photorealist sculptor
    of “everyday” Americans.  
        
     By the 1980s, artists working in figurative style (not the
    mechanically-inspired “super-illusionism” of the Photorealists) were
    included under the umbrella of “Contemporary American Realism.”  Do
    a web search for a few images of work by the following artists: Alex
    Katz, Janet Fish, Jane Freilicher, Alice Neel, Philip Pearlstein,
    and Wayne Thiebaud.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

**7.3 Feminist, Conceptual and Earth Art** <span id="7.3"></span> 
*Note: The National Organization of Women (NOW) was founded in 1966. 
Women artists drew attention to gender inequities in career
opportunities by challenging what they considered the chauvinistic
standards in place throughout the entire history of Western art with
blunt imagery and non-traditional techniques (such as fabric-based
craft).  Conceptual art, which privileged idea over execution, was
ultimately rooted in early European experiments, but flourished in the
context of American freedom of speech.  Monumental art in site-specific
landscapes and urban environments, as well as comprehensive gallery
installations (rather than displays of individual portable works), were
the climatic legacy of Abstract Expressionism.  *  
  
 *In 1971, art historian Linda Nochlin published an article entitled,
“Why Have There Been No Great Women Artists?” (Artnews, January 1971),
which was crucial to the emergence of “Feminist” art and art history.
Conduct a web search for a reprint of the full text or excerpts.*

-   **Web Media: Brooklyn Museum: “Judy Chicago, The Dinner Party,
    1974-1979”**
    Link: Brooklyn Museum: [“Judy Chicago, *The Dinner Party*,
    1974-1979”](http://www.brooklynmuseum.org/exhibitions/dinner_party/)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions:  Read the introduction and click the link at right
    labeled “Website.”  From the left hand side menu, click on
    “Components of the Dinner Party”; view all sections/images.  Back on
    the previous Website page, read the “Curatorial Overview,”
    accessible via the menu on the left.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: The Woman’s Building Website**
    Link: [The Woman’s Building
    Website](http://www.womansbuilding.org/photoessay.htm) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: From the menu on the left, select “History” and read
    the linked essay.  At the bottom of the page, click on the link to
    read the “Photoessay” by Terry Wolverton (2003).  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Hannah Wilke Collection and Archive**
    Link: [Hannah Wilke Collection and
    Archive](http://hannahwilke.com/id24.html) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: View the linked selection of Hannah Wilke’s “radical”
    feminist art in a variety of mediums.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: hannahwilke.com: Excerpts from Writings**
    Link: hannahwilke.com: “ [Excerpts from
    Writings](http://www.hannahwilke.com/id15.html)” (HTML)  
      
     Instructions: Read these excerpts from Wilke’s writings and spend
    some time browsing the links listed on the left-hand side of the
    webpage.  Wilke’s works were provocative in their open sexuality,
    and the ways in which she drew upon her own body – from its youthful
    beauty through the ravages of cancer – broke new conceptual and
    performative ground.  
        
     Expect to spend approximately 30 minutes reading Wilke’s writings
    and browsing the site.  
      
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Reading: feldmangallery.com: Amelia Jones’s “Everybody Dies…Even
    the Gorgeous: Resurrecting the Work of Hannah Wilke”**
    Link: feldmangallery.com: Amelia Jones’s [“Everybody Dies…Even the
    Gorgeous: Resurrecting the Work of Hannah
    Wilke”](http://www.feldmangallery.com/pages/artistsrffa/Selected%20Press%20pages/wilkepress.html) 
    (HTML)  
      
     Instructions: Scroll partway down the webpage to the year 2003 and
    click on Jones’s article.  The link will open a .pdf of the text. 
    Consider the ways in which Wilke’s art intersects with Body Art,
    Feminism, and Performance and the gendered nature of her reception
    during the 1960s and ‘70s.  In which ways is her career emblematic
    (or not) of the challenges facing female artists during this time?  
        
     Expect to spend approximately 30 minutes on this reading.  
      
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Reading: Wikipedia’s “Betye Saar”**
    Link:  Wikipedia’s [“Betye
    Saar”](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Betye_Saar) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Several African American women artists were important
    in the spread of feminist-inspired art, although they did not
    generally receive “mainstream” attention until the 1980s.  Betye
    Saar began her career in California by creating a now iconic
    “**assemblage**” that has proved influential in the work of many
    younger artists.  See the page above for links for further study.
    (Saar continues to be prolific, with frequent exhibitions in all
    media.)  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Reading: ArtLex Art Dictionary: “Conceptual Art”**
    Link: ArtLex Art Dictionary: [“Conceptual
    Art”](http://www.artlex.com/ArtLex/c/conceptualart.html) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Read the linked entry above.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Guggenheim Museum: “The Panza Collection”**
    Link: Guggenheim Museum: [“The Panza
    Collection”](http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/collections/collection-online/show-list/major-acquisition/?search=The+Panza+Collection)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: This presentation of images and entries focuses on
    American Minimal and Conceptual artists.  Review the Minimalist
    artists (above) and focus on the Conceptual artists Bruce Nauman
    (page 2) and Lawrence Weiner (page 3).   
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Estate of Robert Smithson Website**
    Link: [Estate of Robert Smithson
    Website](http://www.robertsmithson.com/earthworks/spiral_jetty.htm)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions:  View the images on this site, which present perhaps
    the most renowned site-specific “earth work” in the United States. 
    Click on the link at bottom of the page in order to read an article
    by Melissa Sanford that discusses issues with upkeep/preservation.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

**7.4 Post-Modernism Pluralism** <span id="7.4"></span> 
*Note: Steel-frame construction allowed for the rise of “glass towers”
that filled the urban landscape in the post-war years, coinciding with
total abstraction and, eventually, Minimalism.  By the late 1970s,
however, architects were returning to earlier ornamentation to counter
the cold geometry of high modernism; in this context, “postmodern,” as
an aesthetic term, was first popularized.  It has come to signify the
gradual move away from stylistic, media, and other strict, qualitative
aesthetic precepts and designations.  Painters began to appropriate
historical styles as well as specific works of art in new ways.  Some
focused on the expression of racial, ethnic, and gender identities that
had been previously denied by the mainstream. *

-   **Reading: Wikipedia’s “Philip Johnson”**
    Link: Wikipedia’s [“Philip
    Johnson”](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philip_Johnson) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Read this entry on Philip Johnson, who is likely the
    most acclaimed American architect of the postwar 20<sup>th</sup>
    century.  Scroll down to “Contents” and choose “The Seagram
    Building.”   Then click on the hyperlink in the text to view a “high
    modern” skyscraper of the 1950s (Johnson collaborated here with a
    mentor).  Back at the “Johnson” homepage, click on “Contents” and
    then “Later Buildings” to read a description and view an image of
    “The Sony Building.”  Note the roofline design, which he borrowed
    from earlier architectural ornament.  This has been discussed as a
    “postmodern” design.  A more extreme example is the “Piazza
    d’Italia” in New Orleans; view it on Wikipedia’s [entry on the
    building](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piazza_d%27Italia).  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Faith Ringgold Website**
    Link: [Faith Ringgold
    Website](http://www.faithringgold.com/ringgold/default.htm) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: In painting and sculpture, “postmodernism” includes
    both borrowing from the past (whether in terms of subject or style)
    and going beyond European-based criteria for definitions of
    “modernity” in art, which focus on “pure” abstraction.  The fact
    that Pop and Photorealism were “modern” offered other ideas, as
    well.  Postmodernism is most often characterized by specific
    expressions of ethnic, racial and gender identities previously
    “hidden” in modernist styles.  Mixed media and new media based on
    new technologies all made for an unprecedented, pluralistic scene by
    the 1980s.  The Faith Ringgold website linked above is the first in
    a series of websites featuring a number of diverse (in terms of
    background, styles, and content) artists, who could be placed under
    this umbrella.  
     On the Faith Ringgold site, scroll down to “Images”; click on and
    begin with “1991,” which includes her best-known works.  These works
    feature her “signature” style, making use of a medium she developed
    that combines quilting (in reference to folk traditions among
    African American women) and painting.  In several series, she
    **appropriates** European “modernist” art in her new form to create
    new messages.  Like Saar (above), Ringgold did important feminist
    work in the late 1960s and 1970s (some can be viewed at this site),
    and is still working and exhibiting prolifically.  (Please note that
    some of the “enlargement” links on the site may not work; however,
    most images as provided are adequate for an introduction.)  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Arthur Rogers Gallery: Robert Colescott**
    Link: Arthur Rogers Gallery: [Robert
    Colescott](http://arthurrogergallery.com/artists/robert-colescott/)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Beginning in the 1970s, Colescott relied heavily on
    appropriating compositions and subjects from art-historical
    masterpieces to create satiric paintings about the exclusion of
    African Americans from art history and history more generally.  He
    adopted a purposefully crude style influenced by comics and European
    “**primitivism**.”  Later, he expanded his oeuvre to include
    large-scale paintings jam-packed with darkly humorous iconography
    related to **postcolonial** reinterpretations of history, as well as
    political commentary on continuing racial tensions, crime, and
    consumerism engulfing American society.   
                  
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Reading: Americana: Journal of American Popular Culture: Jody B.
    Cutler’s “Art Revolution: Politics and Pop in the Robert Colescott
    Painting George Washington Carver Crossing the Delaware”**
    Link: *Americana: Journal of American Popular Culture*: Jody B.
    Cutler’s [“Art Revolution: Politics and Pop in the Robert Colescott
    Painting *George Washington Carver Crossing the
    Delaware*”](http://www.americanpopularculture.com/journal/articles/fall_2009/cutler.htm)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions:  Read the linked article (2010).  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Artnet.com: Peter Schjeldahl’s “The Social Comedian”**
    Link: Artnet.com: Peter Schjeldahl’s [“The Social
    Comedian”](http://www.artnet.com/magazine_pre2000/features/schjeldahl/schjeldahl5-28-98.asp)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Read this exhibition review, taking a look at the
    embedded images (1998).  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: The Broad Art Foundation: “Julian Schnabel”**
    Link: The Broad Art Foundation: [“Julian
    Schnabel”](http://www.broadartfoundation.org/artist_67.html) (Adobe
    Flash)  
        
     Instructions: Schnabel was perhaps the first major American “art
    star” of the postmodern era.  He broke onto the scene in the early
    1980s with paintings that brought back the intuitive brushwork of
    the Abstract Expressionists and figuration related to European
    Expressionist style of the 19<sup>th</sup> century.  His imagery
    remains enigmatic, but he has also done portraits and narrative
    works harking back to art history and used collage elements for
    bold, physical effects in much of his work.  He is often categorized
    as a “**Neo-Expressionist**.”  Visit the website above for some good
    examples of his work.  
                  
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Saatchi Gallery: “David Salle”**
    Link: Saatchi Gallery: [“David
    Salle”](http://www.saatchi-gallery.co.uk/artists/david_salle.htm)
    (HTML and Adobe Flash)  
        
     Instructions: Salle is a contemporary of Schnabel who broke onto
    the American art scene around the same time.  Borrowing from
    Photorealism, Salle expresses the flux of “visual culture”
    characteristic of “postmodern” at the start of the electronic
    revolution.  His juxtapositions of seemingly unrelated images are
    like puzzles; the question of how and whether they add up to
    particular meanings is ambiguous.    
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Museum of Modern Art: “David Hammons”**
    Link: Museum of Modern Art: [“David
    Hammons”](http://moma.org/collection/artist.php?artist_id=2486)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Click on the link above for an introduction and
    several images of works by Hammons in the MOMA’s collection. 
    Hammons is a multi-media artist, with Conceptual underpinnings. 
    Several of his “breakthrough” works in the 1980s were site-specific
    projects in New York that made use of playground basketball hoops. 
    Good reproductions of one of them are posted on [this Visual
    Resources webpage](http://dspace.nitle.org/handle/10090/11960),
    published by Franklin & Marshall College.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Barbara Kruger Website and Cindy Sherman Website**
    Links: [Barbara Kruger
    Website](http://www.barbarakruger.com/art.shtml) (HTML) and [Cindy
    Sherman Website](http://www.cindysherman.com/art.shtml) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: These photography-based artists are sometimes
    referred to as “second generation feminists”—especially Kruger, who
    brings her background in advertising to the fine art world, using
    language as a kind of new iconography.  Sherman has used herself in
    virtually all of her work for several decades, though she always
    appears in different disguises and contexts, obscuring and
    complicating the notion of self-portraiture.  Visit the sites above
    to review their work.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: PBS: “Art 21: Peon Osorio”**
    Link: PBS: [“Art 21: Pepon
    Osorio”](http://www.pbs.org/art21/artists/osorio/index.html)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: The website above presents an abundance of
    information on renowned Puerto Rican artist Pepon Osorio, who works
    in mixed media, focusing on full-scale installations.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Keith Haring Foundation Website**
    Link: [Keith Haring Foundation Website](http://www.haring.com/)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Visit the website above for information on Keith
    Haring, who is famous for bringing graffiti art into the
    international “fine art” world through his distinctive linear
    style.  His works often focus on gay politics and activism (the
    artist died of AIDS at the age of 31).  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: The Brooklyn Museum: “Basquiat”**
    Link: The Brooklyn Museum:
    [“*Basquiat*”](http://www.brooklynmuseum.org/exhibitions/basquiat/)(HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Like Haring, Jean-Michel Basquiat began as a
    street-graffiti artist, with a particularly raw style.  He was
    “discovered” by a prominent New York art dealer and became
    internationally famous before his tragic death at the age of 27.  He
    hedged his public identity as a mainstream Neo-expressionist and
    African American artist (of Caribbean heritage), bringing his unique
    concerns into the elite art world.  Read about him and his work on
    the linked page above.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: The Aids Quilt Website**
    Link: [The Aids Quilt Website](http://www.aidsquilt.org/about)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: The Aids Quilt is a unique, ongoing, and public
    American art project, begun in 1987 and with headquarters in
    Atlanta, GA.  Anyone may contribute and portions are continually
    exhibited throughout the country.  See the history and images linked
    above.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

**7.5 Case Studies: Public Monuments and Sculpture** <span
id="7.5"></span> 
*Note: In a country predicated on government and taxation by the people,
decisions about the art that will be publicly sponsored and displayed
are complicated and widely debated, with tensions often arising between 
professionals in the visual arts and the lay public.  A look at two
cases, Richard Serra’s “Tilted Arc for Foley Square,” New York City
(1981), and Maya Lin’s “Viet Nam Veterans Memorial” for the National
Mall in Washington, D.C. (1982) give some insight into the nature of
these ongoing negotiations as they arise.  (Many additional photographs
of these projects can be found via web searches.)*

-   **Web Media: WUST TV/PBS: “Richard Serra’s Tilted Arc, 1981”; San
    Francisco Museum of Modern Art: Titled Arc; Wikipedia: “Tilted
    Arc”**
    Link: WUST TV/PBS: [“Richard Serra’s *Tilted Arc*,
    1981”](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/cultureshock/flashpoints/visualarts/tiltedarc_a.html)
    (HTML) and San Francisco Museum of Modern Art: *[Titled
    Arc](http://www.sfmoma.org/multimedia/videos/90)*; (Adobe Flash)
    Wikipedia: [“Tilted Arc”](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tilted_Arc)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Explore the links above for information about Serra’s
    work.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: Bluffton College: Maya Lin’s Vietnam Veterans Memorial;
    American Architecture: “Vietnam Veteran’s Memorial”; Wikipedia:
    “Vietnam Veteran’s Memorial”**
    Link: Bluffton College: [Maya Lin’s *Vietnam Veterans
    Memorial*;(HTML) American
    Architecture:](http://www.bluffton.edu/~sullivanm/vietnam/vietnamlin.html)
    [“Vietnam Veteran’s
    Memorial”](http://www.american-architecture.info/USA/USA-Washington/DC-006.htm);
    (HTML) Wikipedia: [“Vietnam Veteran’s
    Memorial”](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vietnam_Veterans_Memorial)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Explore the linked material above for information on
    the Vietnam Veterans’ memorial.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.


