**Unit 1: The Americas: 16th and 17th Centuries** <span id="1"></span> 
*The indigenous and early Colonial culture in South and Central America
as well as Native North American society have continued to resonate
variously in the art and visual culture of the United States.  The
Spanish (funding Christopher Columbus) made the earliest Christian mark,
followed by the English and Dutch, who eventually prevailed in
privileging Protestantism over Catholicism in the forthcoming new
nation. *

-   **Web Media: Los Angeles County Museum of Art’s “American Historical
    Periods”**
    The Saylor Foundation does not yet have materials for this portion
    of the course. If you are interested in contributing your content to
    fill this gap or aware of a resource that could be used here, please
    submit it here.

    [Submit Materials](/contribute/)

-   **Reading: Wikipedia’s “History of the United States”**
    Link: Wikipedia’s [“History of the United
    States”](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_the_United_States)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Use this basic timeline to keep track of the major
    events in American history as we proceed through the units below.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

**1.1 Pre-Columbian Art Forms** <span id="1.1"></span> 
*Note: At the time of European contact with the Americas, Aztec
civilization was producing sophisticated architecture, sculpture, and
painted images on pottery and codices.  Their ceremonial capital,
Tenochtitlan, beneath modern-day Mexico City, is under continual
excavation, yielding new information.  Native North Americans generally
employed ephemeral art materials; however, they also created monumental
“earth sculptures” before the second millennium that remain part of the
American landscape. *

-   **Web Media: Mexicolore’s “Aztec Pages"**
    Link:  Mexicolore’s [“Aztec
    Pages”](http://www.mexicolore.co.uk/index.php?one=azt) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: This website features excellent images of Aztec art. 
    Please browse the site after reading the articles listed below:  
        
     In the left menu, click “Moctezuma” and then the “Death of
    Monctezuma” link on the right menu at top of the page you reach. 
    Read the entire, well-illustrated article on the enigmatic Aztec
    ruler at the time of Cortes (three parts; attributed to a panel of
    scholars).  Then return to the previous right menu to browse “art
    news/exhibition pages” listed near the bottom.    
        
     Return to main Aztec page (as above).  Click “Spanish Conquest” and
    then read the illustrated article, “What Happened to the Aztec Gods
    after Conquest?” (found on the top right hand menu) by Dr. Eleanor
    Wake (2 parts).    
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Reading: The National Park Service: Indian Mounds of the
    Mississippi: "The Mound Builders" and "Building the Mounds"**
    Links: The National Park Service: Indian Mounds of the Mississippi:
    "[The Mound
    Builders](http://www.nps.gov/nr/travel/mounds/builders.htm)" (HTML)
    and "[Building the
    Mounds](http://www.nps.gov/nr/travel/mounds/mounds.htm)" (HTML)  
      
     Instructions: Please read these two webpages as an introduction to
    the Mound Builders, the prehistoric inhabitants of North America who
    built earthen mounds for ritual and residential purposes. "Mound
    builder" is an inclusive name for a number of cultures that lived in
    the Great Lakes Region and the Ohio and Mississippi River Valleys
    from the fourth millennium BCE to about 1700CE. These pages focus on
    Mound Building cultures in the Mississippi Valley, while the
    following reading is about the famous Serpent Mound in the Ohio
    Valley.  
      
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpages above.

-   **Web Media: JQ Jacobs’ “Serpent Mound”**
    Link: JQ Jacobs’ [“Serpent
    Mound”](http://www.jqjacobs.net/archaeo/serpent_mound.html)(HTML)  
        
     Instructions: This site provides summary information on the “Great
    Serpent Mound,” an ancient native Adena burial site in Ohio.  Please
    read about the mound and examine the pictures.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

**1.2 Early Colonial Art** <span id="1.2"></span> 
*Note: Soon after conquest by the Spanish, native artists of Mexico were
enlisted by the new regime; syncretistic art forms (art forms that show
cross-cultural influences) ensued.  In the North American southwest and
Florida, Catholic churches adopted the adobe techniques of the native
pueblos, later mimicked in stone with **Baroque **flourishes.  The east
coast of what became the United States was settled even earlier, with
the first extant depictions dating from the 1500s.*

-   **Web Media: The Saylor Foundation's “Florentine Codex”**
    Link: The Saylor Foundation's [“Florentine
    Codex”](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/Unit-1.2-Florentine-Codex.pdf)
    (PDF)  
        
     Instructions: Please click on the link above to view some images of
    an object known as the “Florentine Codex,” which was commissioned by
    an early missionary.  This object provides eyewitness images of
    Aztec daily life.

-   **Web Media: Patronato San Xavier’s “History” and “Slideshows”**
    Links: Patronato San Xavier’s
    [“History”](http://www.patronatosanxavier.org/preservation/history/)
    (HTML) and
    [“Slideshows”](http://www.patronatosanxavier.org/press-room/photo-gallery/) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Please read about the history of this
    mid-18<sup>th</sup> century Arizona church for a good summary of the
    complex.  Then work your way through the slide shows for various
    views of the building in the midst of restoration.   
        
     About the resource: The website above is hosted by the Patronato
    San Xavier, a non-profit, non-religious group dedicated to
    continuing restoration of the Jesuit church, San Xavier del Bac in
    Arizona.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Web Media: KNME: New Mexico History Museum’s “New Mexico’s
    Segesser Hide Painting”**
    Link: KNME: New Mexico History Museum’s [“New Mexico’s Segesser Hide
    Painting”](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2w5t5OhSPyE) (YouTube)  
        
     Also available in:  
     [Adobe
    Flash](https://web.archive.org/web/20120817010320/http://portal.knme.org/program/moments-in-time/)  
      
     Instructions: Please watch this six-minute video, historian Thomas
    Chavez speaks about several eighteenth-century, banner-like hide
    paintings that represent battle scenes between Native Americans and
    feature some of the earliest known depictions of Spanish Colonial
    life in the Southwest.  They may have been created by native artists
    training with Europeans, or members of the Spanish expedition.   
      
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Reading: History Is Fun: Lisa F. Heuvel’s “Looking with Clearer
    Vision: The Significance of John White’s Watercolors”**
    Link: History Is Fun: Lisa F. Heuvel’s [“Looking with Clearer
    Vision: The Significance of John White’s
    Watercolors”](http://historyisfun.org/Significance-of-John-White.htm)
    (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Please read the linked article above, which discusses
    John White’s renderings of the indigenous populations he encountered
    in the New World.  
        
     About the website: This is the website of the Jamestown Settlement
    and Yorktown Victory Center.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.


